Phase 0: PostgreSQL Installation and Initial Configuration
0.1 Objective

The objective of Phase 0 was to properly install and configure PostgreSQL as the relational database management system (RDBMS) for the PayFusion backend project. This phase ensures a production-ready, secure, and scalable database environment instead of relying on default administrative configurations.

0.2 PostgreSQL Installation Verification

After installing PostgreSQL 18.3, verification was performed using:

psql --version

Expected output:

psql (PostgreSQL) 18.3

The PostgreSQL interactive terminal was accessed using:

psql -U postgres

Successful connection resulted in:

postgres=#

0.3 Listing Existing Databases

To verify available databases:

\l

Output confirmed the presence of:

postgres (default administrative database)

template0

template1

payfusion (project database)

0.4 Creation of a Dedicated Project Database

A dedicated database was created for the PayFusion application instead of using the default postgres database.

CREATE DATABASE payfusion;
Rationale:

Separation of system and application data

Improved security

Easier maintenance and scaling

Production best practice compliance

0.5 Creation of a Dedicated Database User

A project-specific database user was created:

CREATE USER payfusion_user WITH PASSWORD 'StrongPasswordHere';
0.6 Granting Privileges to the Application User

The user was granted full privileges on the project database:

GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON DATABASE payfusion TO payfusion_user;
Why Not Use the Default postgres Superuser?

The default postgres role has:

Superuser

Create Role

Create DB

Replication

Bypass RLS

Using it for applications is discouraged because:

It violates the principle of least privilege.

It increases security risks.

It exposes administrative-level access to application code.

It is not production best practice.

0.7 Verifying Roles

To confirm role creation:

\du

Expected output:

Role name       | Attributes
----------------+---------------------------------------
payfusion_user  |
postgres        | Superuser, Create role, Create DB...

The payfusion_user role was intentionally created without superuser privileges to enforce secure access boundaries.

0.8 Connecting to the Project Database

To switch to the project database:

\c payfusion

Successful connection displays:

payfusion=#

0.9 Phase 0 Completion Status

At the end of Phase 0, the following were successfully configured:

✔ PostgreSQL 18.3 installed
✔ PostgreSQL CLI (psql) accessible
✔ Project database (payfusion) created
✔ Dedicated application user (payfusion_user) created
✔ Proper database privileges assigned
✔ Role verification completed